---
layout: page
title: BF 1001
permalink: courses/bf-1001/
subtitle: "BF 1001: Hebrew Bible/Old Testament"
---

*Offered Online, Fall 2020*

### Course Description

The First Testament of Christian Scripture, also called the Hebrew
Bible or Old Testament, is a fundamental part of Christian tradition
and durable rule of faith and practice. Students in this course will
therefore be introduced to historical and literary data important
for understanding the origins of the Hebrew Bible and its subsequent
function as Scripture in a variety of cultural and religious
contexts.

The broad sweep of biblical tradition will be presented through a
survey of representative books from the Law, the Prophets, and the
Writings. To help foster an ecumenical outlook, primary readings
from the Bible will be supplemented by case studies of classic
Jewish and Christian readings of biblical texts. Students will
develop their exegetical skills by studying these examples, and so
learn to appreciate the diverse literary, canonical, cultural,
historical, hermeneutical, and theological elements involved in
biblical interpretation. In addition, the course will consider some
ways that the Hebrew Bible/Old Testament can feature in the practice
of ministry and in the spiritual practice of faith communities.

*Requirements: Weekly readings, weekly discussions, a presentation, two short papers.*

[Download the latest syllabus (Fall 2020, v 3.6).](https://github.com/danieldriver/Syllabi/raw/master/BF/BF%201001-Driver%202020.pdf)

[Log in to the course on Brightspace.](https://smu.brightspace.com/d2l/login)

### Course Objectives

By the end of the course students should be able to:
	name major Old Testament people and events;
	locate a few important biblical sites on a map;
	give key dates for Israel's history and summarize the succession of superpowers in the ancient Near Eastern political theatre from Egypt to Greece;
	recognize and cite examples of most genres of biblical literature;
	understand the general shape of the Masoretic Text tradition and differentiate it from other canonical orders;
	report on parallel and divergent material across the Law and the Prophets, such as the uses of the Divine Name or the rationales for sabbath observance;
	classify and begin to evaluate a variety of ancient and modern approaches to the Bible.

Students should also be able to identify settings in which the
Scriptures of Israel are read (notably the synagogue, church, and
academy), employ terminology appropriate to these communities, recognize
where their own biographies place them in relation to the Hebrew
Bible/Old Testament and its uses, and monitor and test their individual
attitudes and assumptions. They should be able to extend their awareness
of the Bible's contemporary readers to the Bible's long history of
reception. Finally, students should begin to infer what Jesus meant in
speaking of "the law of Moses, the prophets, and the psalms" (Luke
24:44), and so learn to hear claims about New Testament fulfilment of
scripture in light of the unique voice that the Old Testament retains
along side of the New in Christian Scripture.


## Required Textbooks (Fall 2020)*

The following texts are required. Students are strongly encouraged to
purchase their own copies. Library copies that are not reference works
will be placed on a 2-hour reserve in the [AST Library](http://www.astheology.ns.ca/library/index.html).

A Bible, either **NRSV** or **NJPS** translation
: There are many editions, and you may already own one that will serve well. If you want a study Bible, consider the NJPS alternative described below. Its supplementary notes and essays are exceptional. You may also prefer a Bible without all the commentary (as I usually do).
: **NRSV** Study Bible: Michael Coogan, ed. [*New Oxford Annotated Bible with Apocrypha: New Revised Standard Version*](https://amzn.to/2qpjO6P). 5th ed. Oxford / New York: Oxford University Press, 2018. The NRSV is a standard translation in the academy and in many of the churches affiliated with AST. It features gender inclusive language (though not for God). The notes and essays can be helpful, though they do add considerably to the heft of the volume. This version includes the entire Christian Bible (OT and NT), plus the Apocrypha. It should be useful to you in many other courses at AST.
: **NRSV** Text Only: I find I generally only want the text itself (it's far more portable, and notes can get in the way). In that case, get a [version like this instead](https://amzn.to/34xOeCI).
: **NJPS** Study Bible: Adele Berlin and Marc Zvi Brettler, eds., [*The Jewish Study Bible: Second Edition*](https://amzn.to/36BBqNw) (Oxford / New York: Oxford University Press, 2014). A superb alternative to the NRSV, equally well-regarded in the academy but not well known in the church, the notes and supplementary essays in this study Bible are best in class. The single-column layout is easier to read, too. The main drawback is that it lacks the NT and Apocrypha (for obvious reasons), and so may prove less useful in other courses at AST.

HBFB
: Joel Kaminsky and Joel Lohr. [*The Hebrew Bible for Beginners: A Jewish and Christian Introduction*](https://amzn.to/33myNNo). Nashville: Abingdon Press, 2015. ISBN 978-1426775635

Heschel
: Abraham Joshua Heschel. [*The Sabbath*](https://amzn.to/2NQ8VDj). FSG Classics. Farrar Straus Giroux, 2005. ISBN 978-0374529758

Irenaeus
: Irenaeus of Lyon. [*On the Apostolic Preaching*](https://amzn.to/2oTyNpj). Translated by John Behr. St Vladimir’s Seminary Press, 1997. ISBN 978-0881411744

{% include recommend-head.md %}

Schmid
: Konrad Schmid. [*A Historical Theology of the Hebrew Bible*](https://amzn.to/34CEs2i). Translated by Peter Altmann. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2019. ISBN 978-0802876935
: HBFB gives a good overview of critical issues. Schmid gives a more thorough account, and is much more conversant with European scholarship, but is readable and appropriate for introductory purposes.

{% include recommend-always.md %}
