---
layout: page
title: DTS 2000
permalink: courses/dts-2000/
subtitle: "DTS 2000: Introduction to the Old Testament"
---

*Fall 2024: Offered Online (Asynchronous)*

### Course Description

The First Testament of Christian Scripture is a fundamental part of
Christian tradition and durable rule of faith and practice. Students in
this course will be introduced to historical and literary data important
for understanding the origins of the Hebrew Bible/Old Testament and its
subsequent function as scripture in a variety of contexts. The outlook
will be broadly ecumenical, with case studies that exemplify Jewish and
Christian interpretation.

The broad sweep of biblical tradition will be presented through a survey
of representative books from the Law, the Prophets, and the Writings. To
help foster an ecumenical outlook, primary readings from the Bible will
be supplemented by illustrative commentary from various biblical
interpreters. Students will develop their exegetical skills by studying
these examples, and so learn to appreciate the diverse canonical,
cultural, hermeneutical, historical, literary, and theological elements
involved in the art of biblical interpretation.

- Prerequisites: None.
- Requirements: Weekly readings, four short papers.
- Syllabus:[Download the latest version (Fall 2024, v 2.0)](https://github.com/danieldriver/Syllabi/raw/master/BF/DTS2000-Driver2024).

## Required Texts (Fall 2024)*

NJPS Study Bible, 2nd Ed.
: Berlin, Adele, and Marc Zvi Brettler, eds. [*The Jewish Study Bible: Second Edition.*](https://amzn.to/3O5Paqr) 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014. ISBN 978-0199978465.
: A non-circulating copy is held in the AST Library reference section: **Ref BS 895 J4 2014**.

Davis 2019
: Davis, Ellen F. [*Opening Israel’s Scriptures*](https://amzn.to/3BOER2x). Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2019. ISBN 978-0190948948.
: An AST Library e-book (single user license) is [available online](https://ast.primo.exlibrisgroup.com/view/action/uresolver.do?operation=resolveService&package_service_id=949805670007188&institutionId=7188&customerId=7185&VE=true).

{% include recommend-head.md %}

Heschel
: Heschel, Abraham Joshua. [*The Sabbath*](https://amzn.to/2NQ8VDj). FSG Classics. Farrar Straus Giroux, 2005. ISBN 978-0374529758. AST Library copy: BM 685 H4 2005.

Irenaeus
: Irenaeus of Lyon. [*On the Apostolic Preaching*](https://amzn.to/2oTyNpj). Translated by John Behr. St Vladimir’s Seminary Press, 1997. ISBN 978-0881411744. AST Library copy: BR 65 I63 E6413 1997.

<!-- exclude recommend-always.md for DTS students -->

*Disclosure: As an Amazon Associate I earn from qualifying purchases.*
