---
layout: page
title: HB 3111
permalink: courses/hb-3111/
subtitle: "HB 3111: The Book of Genesis"
---

*Fall 2023: Offered On Campus Only*

## Course Description

From the creation of the world to the call of Abraham, and from the promise of children to the establishment of the people Israel, the book of Genesis is one of the greatest origin stories ever told. Biblical scholars today write about the “lost world” of Genesis, and so try to account for the genesis of Genesis. There is indeed much to learn about the history behind the first book of the Bible. The book has given rise a major history of its own, too, and this history of reception has lately become an area of interest in recent research. The history of the text thus includes the question of how Genesis relates to the so-called Abrahamic religions, and so invites ecumenical study.

This course will consider multiple approaches to the book of Genesis. It seeks to integrate what can be known about worlds behind and before the text into a comprehensive theological vision that includes its role as Jewish and Christian Scripture, from antiquity down through the present day. Students will have an opportunity to sample some of the best ancient and modern interpretations of the book, and to develop their own expositions of it.

- Prerequisites: BF 1001; RM 1000 or GTR 6000 (or permission of the instructor).
- Requirements: Weekly readings, weekly discussions, a presentation, two short papers.

*The course syllabus for Fall 2023 will be posted here in late August.*

<!-- [Download the Syllabus (Winter 2017)](https://github.com/danieldriver/Syllabi/raw/master/HB/HB%203111-Genesis-Driver%202017.pdf) -->

<!--
[Brightspace Login](https://smu.brightspace.com/d2l/login)
 -->

## Required Texts (Fall 2023)*

Cambridge Companion to Genesis
: Bill T. Arnold, ed. [*The Cambridge Companion to Genesis.*](https://amzn.to/3Q7ZnVO) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2022. ISBN: 978-1108438322.


{% include recommend-head.md %}

NJPS Study Bible
: Adele Berlin and Marc Zvi Brettler, eds., [*The Jewish Study Bible: Second Edition*](https://amzn.to/3O5Paqr) (Oxford / New York: Oxford University Press, 2014). ISBN 978-0199978465. If you need a Study Bible, I recommend this one highly. Its notes on Genesis are superb. Be sure to get the 2nd, revised edition. The NJPS is the translation I will reference most in this course, though other modern translations like the NRSV will work.

Anderson
: Gary A. Anderson. [*The Genesis of Perfection: Adam and Eve in Jewish and Christian Imagination.*](http://amzn.to/2jo9Mxy) Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2002. ISBN 978-0664226992.

Levenson
: Jon D. Levenson. [*Inheriting Abraham: The Legacy of the Patriarch in Judaism, Christianity, and Islam.*](http://amzn.to/2joigFe) Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2012. ISBN 978-0691163550.

Provan
: Iain Provan. [*Discovering Genesis: Content, Interpretation, Reception.*](http://amzn.to/2jQobiU) Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2016. ISBN 978-0802872371.

{% include recommend-always.md %}
