---
layout: post
title: Microfilm and the problem of information storage and retrieval
date: 2011-03-29 04:44 pm
tags: [microfilm, archival, Blair A]
---

> The history of modern reference works includes not only tools that continue to thrive today, though often in new forms and under new names, but also examples of experiments that did not prove successful despite great investments of human and material resources. From 1910 to 1934, Paul Otlet and Henri La Fontaine created the Mundaneum in Brussels, which stored information in some 12 million index cards from which staff members would answer mail-in queries. In 1945, Vannevar Bush envisioned a mechanical system of reducing, storing, and retrieving information, the "memex." Many now see the Internet as a fulfillment of that vision, though the frequent references today to Vannevar Bush have more to do with creating a genealogy for the Internet after the fact than with actually explaining its origins. The only tangible result of Bush's vision was the "rapid selector," which Ralph Shaw built in 1949 to retrieve automatically documents on microfilm by having a photoelectric cell identify the congruence between a query code entered by the user and the subject code on the microfilm. After trying to use the rapid selector to sort through vast quantities of documents declassified after the war, Shaw considered it a failure and extolled books as "still the most efficient tool for storing and finding information." But Bush's vision of searching for information following every user's trail of personal associative connections rather than pre-established headings has been more effectively realized with Internet searching Microfilm technology in general did not live up to the enthusiasm that surrounded its initial uses in the 1920s when it was touted as a definitive solution to the problem of information storage and retrieval. But in the 1990s, Early English Books Online [(EEBO)][1] and other projects that transfer microfilm images onto the Web have put to good use the massive investments made in microfilming decades ago.
> 
> The rapid changes in technology, especially in recent decades, have also highlighted, sometimes poignantly, the tremendous investment of human labor in tasks that were soon made obsolete by computers. Many large indexing projects launched in the first half of the twentieth century were completed just as computers were becoming widely available: for example, the Isis Cumulative Bibliography of publications in the history of science was completed in 1984 after sixty-one years of collective work. As an example of the contrast between manual and current computer indexing, the indexes to the early editions of Bartlett's *Quotations* took twenty people six months to complete, while the computerized indexing of the current edition takes a computer 3 hours to compile---down from about 19,200 hours of labor in the nineteenth century. Reference tools are prone to going out-of-date not only in their contents but also in their methods of composition. Our own current practices and results will no doubt rapidly become obsolete too.[^ref]

[^ref]: Ann M. Blair, *Too Much to Know: Managing Scholarly Information before the Modern Age* (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2010), 265--266.

[1]: http://eebo.chadwyck.com/