---
title: 'The best and worst humours'
date: 2012-11-14
---

> Obviously the four humors or temperaments could not be considered
> as equally desirable. The sanguine temperament, associated with
> air, spring, morning and youth, was, and in some measure still is,
> regarded as the most auspicious one. Favored with a well-knit body
> and a ruddy complexion, the sanguine seemed to surpass all other
> types in natural cheerfulness, sociability, generosity and talents
> of all description; even his faults, a certain weakness for wine,
> good food and love, were of the amiable and pardonable kind. Blood
> is, after all, a nobler and healthier fluid than the two kinds of
> gall or phlegm. We remember that certain theorists considered the
> sanguine temperament as the original, or perfectly balanced,
> condition of man; and even after this ideal equilibrium had been
> destroyed by the sin of Adam the predominance of the blood was
> much preferred to any of the other alternatives.
>
> As the sanguine condition was greeted as the most fortunate, so
> the melancholic was hated and feared as the worst. When
> excessively augmented, inflamed, or otherwise disturbed, the black
> gall causes the most dreaded of all diseases, insanity; this
> disease can befall anybody, but the melancholies by nature are its
> most likely prey. And even without a downright pathological
> disturbance the natural or constitutional melancholies -- generally
> considered as _pessime complexionati_ ("the most ill-mixtured") -- are
> both unfortunate and disagreeable. Thin and swarthy, the
> melancholic is "awkward, miserly, spiteful, greedy, malicious,
> cowardly, faithless, irreverent and drowsy." He is "surly, sad,
> forgetful, lazy and sluggish"; he shuns the company of his
> fellow-men and despises the opposite sex; and his only redeeming
> feature -- and even this is frequently omitted from the texts -- is a
> certain inclination for solitary study.

From [_The Life and Art of Albrecht Dürer_](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0691122768/?tag=danrdri-20), by Erwin Panofsky.
Images from (no joke) the US [National Institutes of Health](http://www.nlm.nih.gov/exhibition/shakespeare/fourhumors.html).
