---
layout: post
title: Seminar on Childs and his followers  
date: 2007-10-18 07:54:00 PM  
tags: [Childs B, Seitz C, Sheppard G, St Andrews]
---

Next Wednesday (24 October, 9:15 a.m.), at the Scripture and Theology
seminar here, I am giving a paper and leading a discussion on the topic
of Brevard Childs and his followers.

Discussion will proceed on the basis of my paper and two readings,
circulated in advance. The first and more involved of these is G. T.
Sheppard's introduction to a Puritan commentary he edited for
re-publication. Toward the end it picks up the issue the seminar
discussed yesterday—whether there is an alternative to "story" for
coordinating our exegetical efforts.

-   Sheppard, Gerald T. “Between Reformation and Modern Commentary: the
    Perception of the Scope of Biblical Books.” Pages xlviii-lxxvii in A
    Commentary on Galatians, William Perkins. Edited by Gerald T
    Sheppard. Pilgrim Classic Commentaries New York: Pilgrim Press,
    1989.

The second is a short piece by C. Seitz—I think originally a review of
Childs' 1992*Biblical Theology of the Old and New Testaments*. Among
other things, it gives some feel for the minority position Childs'
followers feel themselves to be in.

-   Seitz, Christopher R. “'We Are Not Prophets or Apostles': The
    Biblical Theology of B. S. Childs.” Pages 102–109 in Word Without
    End: The Old Testament as Abiding Theological Witness. Grand Rapids,
    Mich.: Eerdmans, 1998.

If you are not a usual participant but wish to come along—on the
condition I guess that you are also reasonably near St Andrews—contact
me and I can circulate the readings.