---
layout: post
title: R.E. Clements’ review of my book on Childs
date: 2011-09-19 09:32:11
tags: [Clements R, Childs B, reviews]
categories: nb
---

R.E. Clements wrote a generous review of my book for the JSOT book list.

> The search for a fresh paradigm for a biblical theology resumed with new seriousness in the 1950s, and few scholars contributed more frequently and extensively to this debate than Brevard Childs in the USA. His advocacy of a canonical approach, in which the history of Christian exegesis of the OT was drawn more directly into the presentation, became a fundamental guideline for the new paradigm, resulting in a series of commentaries and introductions to the biblical literature. From the outset this occasioned a sharp confrontation with James Barr who, like Childs, had initially been much influenced by Karl Barth. It established a long-lasting debate expressed in reviews, articles and books, seeking to define more precisely how canon could serve to create a theological agenda. Childs seldom countered criticism directly, but proceeded to develop the original programme with exegetical writings and through encouraging a large number of students to develop his approach in a variety of directions. These inevitably modified the original programme, which became still further stretched as other scholars in Europe and the USA participated in the discussion. Additionally, responses to the Holocaust hovered in the background and elicited concern to re-engage Christian and Jewish exegesis in a fresh way. This detailed critique by D. explores the historical course of the debate, provides a comprehensive bibliography of the most relevant sources, including important reviews, and traces as closely as possible the points that have aroused sharpest contention. The result is a book that is indispensable in showing why, since World War II, historical and theological approaches to the Bible have found it difficult to establish a common ground. It is part biographical and part methodological, looking beyond the work of one scholar to examine major questions about the use and interpretation of Protestantism’s iconic book. It will certainly remain an essential work of reference for a while to come.

Clements, R.E. Review of Daniel Driver, *Brevard Childs, Biblical Theologian*. *Journal for the Study of the Old Testament* 35 (June 2011): 17. [doi:10.1177/0309089211403225](http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0309089211403225)